If you could afford us a certain chunk of time
and at 20 minutes at the end, that would be,
uh, gratefully received.
So I'll leave it with you and you can lead us off, Graham
and whoever else wants to chip on that would be fantastic.
Thanks. Uh, Koto and thank you chair for this invitation.
Uh, we're really excited by the opportunity to talk to you
as New Zealand's leading provider of weed research.
Uh, so the four of us are located within the AG Research
group of the Bioeconomy Science Institute.
Uh, I'm Graham Dol.
I'm a group manager and a professor, um,
with a background in weeds manage weed
management for over 20 years.
I introduced Nigel Bell, who's an expert in plant protection
with 30 years experience.
And Chris Buddenhagen is one of New Zealand's, uh,
leading weeds researchers, especially in Biocontrol
and Madagascar rag Ward.
I'd also like to, uh, introduce to you Zachary
and Gail, who is, uh, the primary author
of the Northland Regional Council Report that was done, uh,
on Madagascar Rag earlier this year.
And so we, we would like to take our submission as read
and we invite questions on both that
and any others that we may be qualified to answer.
Thank, thank you, Graham.
I mean, please any other person online, by all means, chip,
we've, we've got 20 minutes.
If you've got any further remarks
that you would like to offer.
Uh, some of us has actually seen this stuff in the flesh,
so we've got a fairly cognizant understanding
of the difficulty that people face.
Um, Nigel or Chris
or Zachary, do you have anything to add
to Professor Graham at this point?
Um, I'm not a biocontrol expert,
but, um, just a weed expert, but yeah.
Yes. Thank you. Uh, Nigel. I'm pleased.
By all means, I'd, I'd, I'd really like
to entertain some of your thoughts.
If, if we can sort of have you, your vision
of the world as it were.
Oh, okay. Yeah.
Um, I won't add, uh, too much extra to
what Grimes said other than, um, uh, oh yeah.
I've been in agricultural research for, um, a long time now,
and we are really, um, committed to helping out our farmers,
um, and landowners.
And so we are really keen to offer ourselves as to whatever,
um, we can provide to help out in this, um, in this issue
because we know it's pressing.
And, um, the landowner that are affected by it.
Um, it is having a, a, you know, a large impact on them
and would really like to help them out,
but also provide any, um, help with
the likes of containing the weed so that we get time to, um,
come up with other solutions to help out other farmers
before they become affected as well. Yeah,
Yeah. Well, Nigel
on, on that, if I may.
And, and Professor Graham, please, uh,
cut me short if you need to.
Um, we might as well launch into questions,
'cause there's a lot of them coming.
I think the, the real issue for me as the chair
of these wonderful people is, is
that we're all really concerned about this as well
and want to know where anecdotally it is in,
in terms of spread in the island.
'cause I think that's the first port of call in terms
of the response.
If it's look gracious me from north to Taranaki,
then we've got a, a much bigger problem.
But if it's stuck in the Kaka Peninsula
and, you know, around the re airport, then, uh, a notice
of direction, having it notified as a national pest,
all these sort of things can be tools at our disposal
that warrant, uh, further, uh, ministerial oversight and,
and, and coronial funding.
So, question one, where is it and where isn't it
Chris? Most
that isn't he? Yeah,
Carry on. So,
um, the evidence suggests,
the strong evidence suggests
that it's in Northland only, I think.
But, um, as you know, it's a difficult
to distinguish from another species, the gravel groundswell.
And that species is common all over, um, New Zealand,
and especially in areas like Taranaki
and, um, hawk space.
So I would want to confirm any of those sightings
by having photos and materials sent to us to identify.
Uh, I'd say a key step would be to do more in this area.
Uh, okay. Chris, I've gotta cut can,
and then I'm gonna go to Steve Abel.
So if, if I volunteer, this has being a, a, a way forward
that perhaps that you are, you are a suggesting that to do
that you would require it to be considered a,
a national pest and have it noted not
as a notifiable weed rather than something that's localized.
So have it nationalized as it were,
and then you would be seeking funding for the identification
or the not therein.
Is that my understanding?
Yeah, we, we, we, you know, we're not regulators,
we're scientists, so we support, um, by providing evidence
for whomever needs it.
And yes, um, the, you know,
there's also these citizen science platforms like
iNaturalist that have really good, um,
AI based identification.
It may not be good enough to distinguish those two species.
So it really needs a eye, uh, expert eye
to be passed over those observations.
So there's all kinds of tools to increase participation from
that community of, um, people
who use the iNaturalist platform, for example,
and dedicated surveys to double check sites
of concern would be a good, a, a good thing to, you know,
double check if there's any, uh, suspected cases.
So, um, that could be a mix of biosecurity staff
or scientists together. Yeah.
Um, I'd just like to add that, yes,
I agree about iNaturalist
and, um, it's, it's something
that I've been checking periodically just
to see where it's spread.
Um, but it seems to be picked up by some
of the farmers in Northland.
Yes. And, and, um, just as part of an awareness campaign,
it would be quite good to include that.
Yes, It's, of course Zachary, I think,
and naivety is probably our worst enemy,
and apathy is also something that we have to grapple
with. Mike Butter's
Got a question. Ah, thank you
chair. Um, I just had some questions around,
um, some of the risk pathways.
And you talk about, um, you know,
what particularly alarms me is hay
and agricultural equipment or forestry equipment.
And given that it was identified in 2022,
and here we are three years later,
and as a farmer, I sit there
and look at the potential impact by either Pmu farm, uh,
65%, um,
or 35% reduction in, uh, carcass weight per hectare.
That's pretty significant.
And, um, I'm just interested in your thoughts into whether
there could be a, um, a controlled area notice
or something to try and restrict that
or minimize that risk of spread,
because I'm really concerned there would've been a lot
of hay, potentially silage mm-hmm.
Uh, go out north and down into the white
catto and things like that.
So it feels like it, we need a bit more urgency.
Just interested on your thoughts.
I think in my, my personal opinion is, uh,
and you know, I've done a, I've worked
as an economic advisor to the government and,
and, you know, evaluating different policy mechanisms,
and it's very difficult to really answer
what the best mechanism is,
but we totally agree with the scientific, uh, justification
for trying to restrict spread.
And so I think scientifically that makes a lot of sense,
particularly because of the level
of economic cost that exists.
And that might, we don't know whether
that 35% reduction is high
or low, uh, given that we don't have much information on it,
but it, we know that the spread it, it is,
the spread is possibly quite significant and quite quick.
And so we totally, I, I think we have,
we believe there's strong justification
for limiting the spread.
And just to sub on that too, would you also, um, think
that waterways would be another, um, pathway
for spread?
I know certainly in mid Canterbury, um, irrigation ditches
and nodding thistles are a great, uh, a great, uh, means
of getting the spread seed spread everywhere.
Mm-hmm. Would you think
that would be a risk up in north end as well?
What would you say, Chris? Yeah,
Yeah. Um,
so we do, I think, I think so.
But we should do some work on seed bank longevity.
Um, the, in terms of the silage question, there's a lot
of evidence from other weeds that silage almost always kills
the seeds that are in silage.
We have some really tough weeds like, um,
yellow bristle grass, for example, that dies in silage.
So it's possible that silage isn't a risk,
but hay would be, um, the, the, the timing
of peak flowering and peak germination
and, um, ex exactly when
and where it'll, it's at the most productive stages is
also important information.
And I do think that it would spread down ditches, of course,
it would float along the water.
And, and, you know, especially as water levels drop
after a rain, you know, you could imagine
that nice disturbed site being colonized.
So of course, you know, that's a risk, I think, um,
you know, more needs
to be understood about when exactly it germinates the most.
So you, you could take strategies in, in a given area
to reduce the probability of establishment in a,
in a field at that time.
Um, so, you know, there's a lot to be done.
I just wanted to mention also
that we'd done a weed hazard ranking for over 18,000,
introduced plants in New Zealand,
and this plant comes out on the top 10 for the north island,
um, and in the top 300 for the south island,
uh, Canterbury region.
So 300, the top 300 may not sound that high.
It's certainly not as high as the north island,
but that's out of 18,000 species that we, we assess.
So that's in the top 5% still.
So it's, it's, it, the other thing is that in Australia
it's an annual, and in New Zealand, in Northland, it's a,
it produces flowers year round.
So that's a distinction.
It may, it may behave differently for the south in terms
of the flowering period and so on.
So, you know, there's a lot to be, um, sorted out in terms
of understanding
how the threat might play out just from basic biology,
really simple science, but important science.
Thank you. Chris, I have a question for Miles Anderson.
Yeah. Um, thanks for your time.
Have you done any modeling on, on the spread as far as
where you think how far will spread, um,
next few years without anything being done and,
and with various treatments?
Um, we, we do have some preliminary work,
which we started out, um, with no funding.
Me and another researcher from BSI, uh, formerly landcare.
Um, and that model
that we're running can actually test different intervention
strategies and social interactions as well.
So it's a multidimensional model,
and it can, can include climate change
and climate suitability.
So we'd really like to implement that model and,
and test some of the different strategies.
And it could be a way to test whether
adaptive management is working.
Um, so the indications are actually
that it's been relatively slow.
It's probably been in Northland for a long time.
You know, it was misidentified for years, so
it's been relatively slow in Northland,
but that doesn't mean that it's not gonna speed up.
Um, so, um, we, we really don't know enough
to say how far it's spread at this point.
And I, I would say that's a key step.
I wondered if Chris
or Zach, whether you might be able to, uh,
comment on the modeling that John Keen has done
for the species and that we refer to in the submission.
Yeah, you wanna do that one, Zach?
Yeah. Um, there were just a few parameters that, um,
he wasn't quite sure about.
So it is sort of a preliminary model
And what could show Zach.
Yeah, yeah.
Uh, well, it did show that it is likely to be, um,
suitable to a large amounts of the north island
and parts of the south island,
Large parts of the south island, actually. Yep.
I, I must confuse that, gentlemen.
I've actually seen this stuff up in Car,
car Peninsula a couple of times, um,
being on site in the primary farm.
So I am cognizant of it as a woody tissue plant
that could look quite often likes beer,
soil, and the way it goes.
Mm-hmm. Um, kind of a question on the back of Mr.
Anderson's question, um,
but probably as much as a question as a statement,
we've got our officials coming in from NPI after you lot.
Um, what's your wish list look like with this, really
and truly now, I have heard that it would be having it
as a nationally identified piece so we can wrap a campaign
around it because, um, it's my understanding that the part
of the war we're struggling with is misidentification,
and that people are not cognizant of what they're wrapping,
run, run, running a windrow through a baler
and how it goes, et cetera, et cetera.
So, um, you know, you, you're on, you're on air,
you're live, and we've got NPI officials in the
room. What would you tell 'em?
I think really in terms of the BSI mark, we, we really,
we see that there's a very, there's a lot of uncertainty
and we think that the issue needs more investment.
And I think really it comes down to prioritization.
And I wondered if I pass to yourself, Chris,
to speak about the areas that you might see
as research priorities for this.
We, um, yeah, so that national interest pest response,
there's a number of other plants like Nigerian Wild,
wild rice, um, for example, that have, um,
kind of a national approach.
And I do think that a, um, it,
it would be a shame to put all the responsibility on
Northland region, um, alone.
Um, especially if, you know,
if we're holding the line really means trying to keep on top
of those long distance dispersal events
that really make you, um, kind of,
that any long distance dispersal event that might occur
by chance, say from human dispersal especially.
That's the kind of thing you want to get on top
of immediately.
And that's not necessarily just the leading edge in
Northland, but anywhere else it could show up.
So those, those kinds of responses do need a little bit
of coordination, and it can't just be, um,
one regional council
or, um, there needs to be coordination too, in terms
of revisiting sites.
If anything's been controlled, you really need
to make sure you follow up
and never forget to go back to any of the leading edge kind
of infestations. Thank you.
Chris, I've got a, sorry,
I don't mean to interrupt you, Sue.
I've got a question from Mike Butrick,
and we are fairly thin on time, so, sorry.
Thanks, Jim. I just had,
I just had a question, probably two parts.
One is around chemical control
and second is around, uh, potential, um,
biological control in terms of chemical control.
Are you aware, you know,
currently people are using two four D
and, uh, met sulfur type, uh, products, which actually have,
um, some negative impacts on pasture and clovers.
Are you aware of any other chemicals in other jurisdictions
that, uh, could potentially, um, you know, be of benefit
that we don't currently have available here?
Um, the chemicals used overseas are actually mostly
harsher than the ones used in Northland, unfortunately.
Yeah. Well, the other side is that, um,
there's still some work to be done on surfactants
and timing, and, you know, there,
there could be some really, um, key
and relatively straightforward research to be done that
would improve the situation.
Even with the tools, we have different mixes
and, you know, just formalizing a lot of these experiments
that the farmers have already started,
but doing it, you know, correctly could really, um,
improve the situation and give them a few more tools and,
and also understanding the perfect timing is often a
key aspect of these things.
Yep. And in terms of, um, biological controls, um,
I think I was reading through some of the stuff you, um,
supplied to us previously.
It was a little bit of work being done,
I think it might've been in one of the African countries.
Mm-hmm. Um, have you got any, um, research
or in terms of
what potentially could be biological controls?
Um, my impression from the feasibility study
that came outta landcare is that there's one agent
that's being tested for Australia,
and they're, they haven't sorted out whether it'll attack
any of the native CIOs in Australia or New Zealand.
So that's, that would be one thing.
They haven't done enough exploration to know that they've
tracked all of the potential agents and Russ and fun fungi
and that kind of thing haven't been investigated in full.
And then the agent that they released in Hawaii ended up
attacking another non-native SIO
and didn't lay eggs on the, um,
the target plant and laid it more on this other sinesio
or, or another species.
So, um, it's like, you know,
when they force it to lay eggs on, on that one, on,
on the target, it does it,
but when they're an alternative, it prefers the alternative.
So you, you know, there's a bit of, um,
that's not a candidate necessarily, um,
even though I wouldn't mind if that other,
that other weed's also present here and is also a problem.
But, you know,
Thank you, gentlemen. I
don't mean to be rude, but we've sort of met time.
Um, this conversation's not going away
and we'll pro probably, almost certainly get you back in,
uh, for the same length of time
or more as this, uh, problem con, you know, continues.
And we, we look for ways to alleviate, uh, you know,
the pressure on rural communities
and the damages about to do so.
Thank you so much for your time, very grateful
for your time, and have a wonderful afternoon. Thank
You. Thank
You for the invitation. No, thank
you, James. Thanks a million. Thanks.
Right, thanks a million. Exactly.
NPI officials are in the room.
Stuart Anderson, always a pleasure to see you, sir.
Yes, you see, you, um, you likewise, John.
Um, please, by all means, grab a seat.
We got your for 20, you are gonna get a fair degree of, uh,
third degree about how we fix it, how we don't, what, what,
what it look like, where we get money from, given
that it's very little, um, and all of the above.
Obviously you heard the, uh, the hearing of evidence, then
you lead off on what you think
and yeah, let the team give you good some questions.
Great doc. Uh, thank you.
Um, and thanks for opportunity to come and talk to this.
Um, uh, for those that don't know me, um, Stuart Anderson,
deputy Director General by Security New Zealand, MPI, uh,
and John Walsh, uh, who many of you will know is, uh,
director of our peace management group, uh,
in biosecurity at NPI as well.
Um, so look, just, just a few remarks
and then, uh, yes, we can use the time, uh, to kick
around some questions and discussion on what we do here.
Um, like I say, um, appreciate the opportunity
to come and talk about this.
Uh, we do appreciate, uh, you know, the serious nature
of this weed, uh, and the damage
and the impacts that it, that it is having
and can have, um, also acknowledge, you know, Mr.
Sizes petition and the points that he's made in it.
Um, uh, his recommendations, uh, you know, largely, uh,
you know, there's a sensible recommendations
and we agree that, that those are the things
that really should be, should be happening
and should be focused on, um, particularly around, um,
uh, more coordinated focus
and drive on education, information, awareness and practices
and things that can be done.
Mm-hmm. Um, you know, we not,
and it's been referenced, um, late last year, uh,
minister Hagar met with council, uh, et cetera up north.
It was agreed out of that, that, um, this was best led
and coordinated by councils and industry
and stakeholder, um, partners in that, um,
with us supporting, we are committed to supporting
and doing what we can to help, um, that collaboration
and coordination, um, and, uh, and have offered
and continue to offer that support to the working group, uh,
to drive some coordinated activity
and focus, uh, in this area, figure out what is realistic
and what we can actually do about it across those
areas of options.
Um, having said that, totally acknowledge the role
that MPI needs to play here as well, uh, and, uh,
and help with, help with wherever we can to get traction
and some action happening.
Um, and as I say, we are committed to,
to playing our part in this, with that group, um,
of councils and industry, uh,
and whatever comes outta that in terms of
feasible options on the table, um,
control nationally coordinated communication, et cetera, um,
to see what, see what we can, we can do together to deal
with something that probably has been
around for some period of time.
But, uh, but nonetheless, does, does pose a risk
and does have a serious impact on people
and farmers that are actually dealing with it at the moment.
So, with that, um, I think if we,
Can I lead off, and I'm gonna go straight to Mike,
what would the counterfactual look like if this
stuff did spread?
Okay. We're all cognizant that it's an issue as far
as we're aware it's a localized issue.
Uh, I think that's up for debate,
and we haven't really squared that.
I'm also aware that whether we are the current members
of the Crown or not, and this lock get back in
or not, it's gonna be an ongoing issue.
So putting the politics aside,
knowing there's really little money what is lost
by making it a nationally identified pest, uh,
that would lifts the elevation of concern
to then give you the potential tools,
whether you are negotiating with a slot
or, uh, like here or our lot.
So you get the tools
and the funding to make this kind of, uh,
an awareness campaign that we can all wrap around. Yeah,
I'll get, I'll get John to expand on that,
but I, I guess what I would say is, um, sure, you know,
unwanted organism status, uh, you know, with all
of these things, when, when they arise
and when we find them, um, is absolutely worthy
of considering and looking at whether they should be
classified as those if they're not already.
Mm-hmm. However, what what I would say is, um,
the unwanted organism status, um, is not necessary.
All needed to actually coordinate action
and get things happening and deal with these things.
Uh, there's a lot that there's a lot that can be done, uh,
without having that status.
So it's, it's, it's not,
it's not the deciding factor in terms of what we do,
but I'll get John to, uh, expand
and talk more to that specific point.
Sure. Thanks, Joe. Um, so we've, we,
we've got a pest that's been here for a couple of decades,
and at least in our region as well,
establishing wealth widespread and causing impact
and not, not a material impact at at
that fact, at that point.
Yeah, sure. Um, uh, the use of a UA status, um,
uh, would be helpful if we wanted to utilize some
of the ugly other regulatory tools that we've got.
Yes. In the by security act.
So if we wanted to run, um, of a region, wanted
to run a small scale management program, if we wanted
to put a controlled area notice in place,
we don't think those tools are the right
tools for the, for the moment.
Um, if, if we think they are, let's let, let's say we get a,
we, we get a small spread to, uh, the Waikato, um,
and it looks like it's manageable.
And the Waco Regional Council wanted
to put a small scale management program in place.
Um, we could, uh, flip the UI switch immediately.
Um, the, the, the challenge we got with, with UI
with this particular one, uh, relates to, um,
uh, uh, the really strong similarity
with gravel Brownsville, um,
and the ability for people to identify them.
And we don't want to put farmers in particular in a position
where they say mowing hay on their dairy unit,
moving it down the road, um, to their runoff,
and they have it, and they, and they have broken the law.
So we think there's a better way to deal with it.
And we agree with the committee entirely, that elevation
to a national level
and strongly, um, communicating the risks,
what it looks like and what we can all do about it,
is the thing is the probably the most critical thing
to happen right now, but don't think UA status helps that,
and we just worry that Uua status
might complicate it a little bit.
Thank you, John. We don't need 'em
to trigger those other tools at the moment. We
Do need, okay. So it's a timing thing.
So in the order that they were asked
of me, Mike, Steve, Sue, Joe, and
Den Miles and Rachel, uh, thanks, gee, I just, um,
and I use the comment as the similarity
to swap out is actually probably elevates the risk.
Mm. In, in, in one respect.
Because, you know, if it's a, a nodding thistle,
a nodding thistle, that's what it is.
If it's something that's, you know,
you risk misidentification, I think that's probably one
of the big challenges, as you say, um,
interested in the threshold for, again, um,
and what would, um, what would trip the debt in one
of those, because I sit there
and think it's been identified in 2020, so I look at the,
um, potential remediation or in the plan for, um, north
and regional Council is not, uh, consulted next year, um,
will come into effect 2027.
I mean, the clock's ticking, and we've got hay being made
and transported and machinery going left, right center, all
around the regions, all around New Zealand.
And to my mind, I sit there
and I go back to that 35 cent reduction in carcass weights,
which would be catastrophic for our sector.
And it just feels to me
that there should be a lot more urgency.
Yeah. Yeah. So, so the threshold for, for a can.
So, um, if we to put a can in place, um,
there'd be, um, uh, movement controls, um, uh,
and there'd be quite a high administrative burden
because, you know, it's over quite a wide landscape.
We, we think that we're better to go down there
with education and information, um,
and really push, you know, what we would call that sort
of voluntary assisted end
of compliance rather than the harder
end of compliance for the moment.
The, the step down from a canned,
Uh, our ACT's fairly blunt.
Yeah, yeah. Um, yeah, not regulation, no.
So step down from a can would be a small scale management
program, which, which our regional council would run.
Um, this has probably got beyond that.
So the, the, the, uh, the access that you need
to have degree of confidence you can deal
with the problem in three years.
So no, probably not.
And so then the next thing is the
regional PE management plan.
Um, and so that does give, uh, NRC some,
some regulatory powers.
And so they have managed to move it into their, um, RPMP,
um, uh, not easy to do outside of the review cycle.
They have managed to do that
by displacing gravel groundswell, um,
and they've applied the gravel groundswell, um,
uh, good neighbor rule.
Um, my, uh, our expectation is that as they complete,
complete the review, formalize it in their r uh,
in their RPNP, they'll probably put some other
regulatory controls around it.
So regulation I think is not the, um,
easiest thing for this particular, uh, weed in,
in the state that we have it in.
Um, we think it's the information, um, uh, that
what do I need to do about it?
How do I identify it?
Um, we think that's probably the place we need
to go in order to best manage the pathways of spread.
Thank you. Uh, Joe, you're up Live.
Live and your camera's on mute. Thank you so much. Thank
You, Steve. Thank you.
I just have a question about the, um,
educational piece for farm for, you know, farmers
and farming rural communities.
You talk about it to me,
I feel like it's being a bit reactive instead of proactive.
And is there any plans to have, I guess,
a nationwide educational program, uh, you know, like a,
a bit of a, a road show around the country?
And I know that there'll be some places that are
probably really likely to have an incursion of this,
but would you not see the benefit or is,
or a benefit to doing a proactive road show, um,
where people can learn about
what this particular part looks like in, in reality?
And also, you know,
'cause we hear about un maybe unverified, um,
sightings on the East coast and things like that.
So is it not best to be proactive rather than reactive?
I'm just interested to know if there's any plans for
that type of thing.
Yeah, so having, um, observed the, uh,
the other submissions in the rest of the hearing, we,
but we, we agree, uh, that that proactive
national communication needs to be set up.
It's not that there isn't anything being done at the moment.
Uh, so, um, uh, NPIs, um, on farm, uh,
advisory, uh, team, um, have been actively out there, uh,
disseminating information, disseminating information about,
um, uh, Madagascar Rag and others.
But I think we just need some stronger coordination.
And so we, we, we are, uh,
certainly intent on reaching into the current coordination
group, so the council industry lead group,
and finding a way to support them to, to lift that up.
Yeah. Thank you Joe.
Uh, Sue then, and then Rachel and Mar, my
Question was actually answered before it was
about why not,
Right? All right, now,
Rachel and Mars.
Yes. So I, Steve, sorry.
Sorry, mate. Sorry. I guess, I guess I,
I think the kind of the view from the submitters
that we've heard from, and also I think from the committee,
um, is that we just do need to see some more urgency
around it because, um, you, you said that there were lots
of other things that could be done, um,
even if it didn't meet the threshold for some
of the interventions from NPI,
but I guess I'd like to know what are those things?
I mean, you've talked a little bit about them,
but, um, that this does have potential
to have a huge economic impact is already having an economic
impact, but a greater economic impact if it were to spread.
And so, you know, we've talked, I think of some
of the previous hearings around things like, you know,
the Diddy mow Clean Check dry campaign,
because as a South island mp, I, I would hate for it
to spread its way through the north island
and get into the South island.
Um, and so rather than waiting till that happens,
and then it gets lifted up to that status
and everybody, you know, has to rush and do all the things
and put millions and millions of dollars in to a project,
why can't we put some more tools in now to
actually stop it from spreading
and support the region on the ground
where it already is in existence?
Yeah. So look, I, I agree.
Um, uh, you know, and,
and we are, so, so what we are going to do though is,
is lean in and help to make sure that some
of these things drive and they get moving, uh,
a bit quicker and get lifted up.
Um, the national awareness is one bit of it on records.
Um, you know, we've, we have heard,
and we know that control control is really difficult.
Um, however, there could be some things
that are worth exploring, but further biocontrol, et cetera.
Um, so yeah, I think what we need to do quite quickly here
is identify out of all of that, what are the ones
that are the most feasible or likely to pursue
and get agreement between us
that these are the ones we really should
lean into and look at.
Um, and then between us, uh, push those along and,
and get them moving, um, with, with, with a focus
and some urgency on them.
Um, but yeah, look, um, we're, we're, we're absolutely, uh,
you know, committed and up for that
and for leaning in with, with the others, uh,
to actually get, get this stuff moving and,
and get some greater coordination across it.
So, supplementary Sue,
Um, you talked about it being when it's un when it's not
the WO status, how it would be, you saw it best managed
by councils, and that was followed, that came oh,
guards meeting the end of last year.
But are you relying on, does that mean, I'm just trying
to understand how the funding works.
Does that mean you're relying on council money to do most
of the, um, education program,
or is the government NPI money as well
or is it a combination, or do you attack it Well, a two pro?
Well, it's a combination, really.
I mean, uh, so the, the, the agreement between everyone was
that, uh, it would be best coordinated
and led by that group with councils
and industry, uh, representatives.
So definitely dear New Zealand with Palm, et cetera.
Um, however, uh, us supporting
and being part of that, whatever comes outta that in terms
of things that need to be done, um, that
that's a conversation, then an agreement between all of us
of, of everyone contributing, uh,
what's reasonable for that.
And, and we, um, you know, we, we, we want to,
and we'll be part of those decisions
and conversations in terms of, uh, what gets agreed
to be done and what's reasonable for who to contribute
what. So,
So, so just, um, follow up on two that, so the way we,
we work with regional councils
and industry generally, so we do have a collaborative
approach and unfortunately, you know, we do end up with, um,
uh, more pests here than, than we'd like.
And, um, you know, we've, we've, we've, we've got a, um,
problematic coastal weed that we're dealing
with the moment we're working really collaborative,
collaborative collaboratively with councils
and landowners on that.
And so that's kind of, it's a good model. Mm-hmm.
Um, but, you know,
I think we all agree we just need to lift at the moment.
Okay. Thank you, John, Steve and Miles,
and that's a sort of a wrap team.
Yeah, I mean, I, I think you pretty strongly sense from us
that, uh, we are probably anxious that, um,
insufficient will be done
and that, you know, we'll come back in a year's time
or three years' time or five years time
and be lamenting that we didn't do more now, um,
to stop it from spreading, becoming a worse problem and
therefore costing us a lot more.
Um, and I guess my question is, do you need
us as a committee to give a really clear, uh,
view that we really think this is a critical thing
that needs to be, um, addressed and
Cost a billion?
Or is it a problem of you've got a multitude?
I mean, we know there's a multitude
of weed species in this country,
and perhaps this doesn't meet the bar for being
any more important than the other ones you're dealing with.
Um, because, you know, our concern is
that it's the stitch and time problem.
If we don't do all we can now,
and do we need to get more pressure on the minister to
mobilize extra funds, you know,
and what could we be doing to
give you the mandate to do what's necessary
to properly deal with it?
'cause we don't wanna be to cut.
Yeah. We can let this chap.
Oh, look, I mean, I think, um, uh, you know,
with all these weeds and pests
and things, uh, you know, it comes down to, uh, there,
there's always a prioritization decision
set of choices to make.
Um, with this, in this particular case, uh, uh, I think it,
it does, what it does come back to is what are the,
what are the realistic, feasible options in front of us
to actually pursue
and drive with this, given what we know about it now
and then what we don't know, um, what are the realistic set
of options, uh, that we can,
and actions that we can take here to move forward with it.
Um, and then, uh,
and then we, you know, between us, we, we,
we can agree those and actually lean in and do them.
I, I don't think, um, I don't think, uh, it's a case of,
um, not, uh, you know, not being able to proceed and,
and take action here.
Um, I think there are clearly some things
that we know are easy to do.
There's a few things in terms of control methods
and solve that, uh, are, are more challenging,
but, um, getting clarity on how we prioritize
what those things are, and in between the parties
that are all committed to it,
let's actually, uh, move on it.
So I, I, you know, I think I, I, I think that's,
that's really what we need to, we need to do acknowledging
as well that something has been around for a while.
It's not a new inclusion, a small scale that,
that we know could easily be contained
and dealt with and eradicated.
Uh, it's something bigger than that.
And so there's a bit more to, to, to, to,
to navigate through with it. John. Um,
The, the only thing I'd add to that is, uh, it,
it will become just another weed.
Well, it is just another weed.
There are, unfortunately, too many of them, some
of the measures that we want might want to take for this
or that we are taking for others, they,
they ought to be complimentary.
So that's what pathway management is about.
So Goan on Farm by security practice, um, will serve us well
for this pest as it will for other pest weeds.
Um, uh, rural contractors, cleaning, cleaning on
and off farms will help with this
as it will help with lots of others.
So there's, there's some complementarity
we can achieve here.
Mines, yeah.
So how do you monitor the councils to make sure
that they're actually keeping up with play, so to speak?
And how do you, so how do you know that the councils are
reacting in a way that you would be satisfied with?
Well, well, uh, I mean, obviously accounts as are held
to account, uh, you know, through their constituents
and so on as well, and if it's in their regional plan.
Uh, but, uh, again, you know, as John has said, uh,
you know, the best way, you know, we found
with these pest management, uh, issues across,
across a number of the things that we work on, um, is
that we, we, we work together really well,
and we are clear on who is, who's doing what
and who's responsible for what.
And that we, we get some organization
and coordination around it,
and we hold each other to account
to actually drive those things and make sure they get done.
So if it started popping up around the yata,
and you think, thinking
that maybe it's come from the equine community with their,
or the, uh, contractors
or whatever, do you have the potential to escalate
what you do to put more pressure on council to,
or is it just those two levels?
No, no. And I think, yes, we do so,
and as, as John said earlier, um, if, uh, you know,
if if these things spread further and they escalate
and they become more of a problem, then, then,
then there are other, there are other levers
and there are other things in the toolbox, uh, to pull, uh,
both regulatory, um, and for us to step in, uh, as well.
So, uh, so yes, there are those options
and, uh, you know, we, we, we, those are all available, um,
to, to take those steps.
Um, should, should it be,
should it be warranted and necessary.
So very quickly, um, um, Mike's got a question.
I've got one too. Um, Mike, you go first
To, uh, thanks, Jim.
Just, um, there's been a lot of talk about the urgency
of the problem, um, from submitters us and,
and you guys as well.
What's that look like? You know, is it everybody get ahead?
Is there gonna be a plan in a month or six months
or 12 months, or have you able to,
have you got any indicative timeframes about
what it looks like going ahead or
Ads In the paper Or
Yeah, Yeah, yeah.
Um, look, I, I think we need a plan, um,
much faster than six months.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, and we, we need to, we need to
figure out some, um, priority actions first of all.
And I think getting that national, uh, awareness program is,
would be a smart thing to do.
Very much. Some, some priorities on the same side,
I think would be really helpful as well.
We had some good suggestions from ag research today. Yeah.
Um, there's a little bit of work we could probably do
to kick the, um, uh, bio control agent along as well.
So, uh, NRC had a helpful submission, uh, uh, item on
that in their submission, which was, um,
let's understand the genetics a bit more of
what we've got in New Zealand, which will help with
that relatively small cost.
So let's get that kicking along.
Uh, and I think you, you may or may not be aware, but
after, um, uh, the councils were here, uh, they, they,
they heard the message around the need
to better understand the economic impact.
And so that piece of work is underway now as well.
So there's action, I think. Yeah.
Well, I think you'd agree
and, um, everyone here would agree that,
that we are all quite pressed
to have more action done on this.
Um, I suppose as much as a parting shot, a statement as,
as is a question you king for day,
how much money would you throw at this?
Because I know, Stuart,
you guys are battling everything all in sundry all at once,
and it's not like this is, um,
not the only priority you have on the
table, but you king for a day.
You know, do you, this is about money, isn't it really?
We just need more coin, uh, thrown at, at an exercise, um,
that would allow you to nationalize this problem.
Like all the other problems you have by secure,
we know world it's worth, it's worth
billions if we get it wrong.
I mean, across all of our pest management programs, uh,
you know, you can always put more money, uh,
in all our biosecurity activities.
Um, there's always, always more that can go in, um,
but understand that that's however not realistic.
So, so we have to prioritize, uh, with this one.
Um, I think there's a lot we can do without requiring a huge
amount of investment and essentially investment.
We can, we can and will put into this the activities
that's been outlined in Canada here
and some of the stuff that John's referenced.
Um, they don't require a huge amount of investment. Mm-hmm.
Uh, and we're up to putting our share in and, um,
and we know, uh, the other parties will,
will contribute a share as well.
So there's enough that can be done yet without,
without going crazy large amount of money.
Well, I'm pretty upon you. Good gentlemen.
Come back in and that sort of three months,
if you could give us an
update, I allows that, that would be great.
Yes. Yeah.
Thank you team. Thank you so much. Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks.